Hey friends, we have a
new sponsor today, and I
want to make sure that
you support them because they
make Hansel minutes possible. Raven
DB, it's a document database
that's non-relational and fully transactional.
It's available for windows and
Linux with official client API
APIs for.net. The JVM go
Ruby, no JS and Python.
Raven DB is designed for
high performance handling tens of
thousands of requests, even on
a single node. Now, Raven
DB is capable of on
the fly optimization, dynamic indexes,
and much more. It has
a fully loaded gooey, which
means it's simpler to operate
and you don't need, you
know, arcane incantations on the
command line. It just works.
It's fast and it's right.
Download your free community edition@ravendb.net.
That's our a V E
N db.net. Hope you check
it out.  Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
Hansel minutes. And today I'm
talking with Charles Petzold. How
are you, sir? Good, good.
You know, I taught a
number of your books. I
was taught by your books
and taught one of your
books in school. Particularly my
favorite book was a code
that you wrote. I love
that book. Oh, thank you.
Thank you. It's such a
joy, the hidden language of
computer hardware and software. And
I understand that you're working
on a new book and
who knows how long it'll
take you to finish it.
The new book is I've
been working on it off
and on for 15 years.
So I it's. And as
I've been thinking about it
and putting it off, it's
gotten more complex. I've created
a lot more reference material
for it. And so each,
each chapter is like a
couple of books, shelves full
of, of, of reference material.
It's just an enormous task
that I've set up for
myself when you're putting together
a book that explores like,
you know, historical foundations of
computing, the cultural context of
computing, how do you make
sure you don't accidentally write
like 10,000 pages and take
over a shelf? That's it's,
it's hard. I have this
particular book plotted out pretty
well. And I head, and
I know what there's going
to be 10 or 11
chapters, and I know what
each chapter has to cover,
but I'm gonna have really
have to restrain myself to
keep the, the individual chapters
to about maybe 35 pages
a piece. So the book
comes in at about 350
pages on the other hand,
there's I don't think this
particular book is going to
appeal to a whole lot
of people. So in one
sense, I'm writing it for
myself. And so I'm thinking
I can just make the
chapters as long as I
want. And it book comes
in at a thousand pages.
I care. So I don't
know. We'll see, we'll see.
It's, it's a work in
progress. Do you write books
for yourself or do you
write them for, for our
mass audience? I mean, I
read code almost 20 years
ago and now 18 years
ago. And I think of
it as being a book
that's, it's kind of like
the missing Tetris piece from
my computer science education. Like
it's that piece that they
didn't teach me in school.
Yeah. Yeah. I certainly wrote
that for an audience. The
audience that I had in
mind were our parents, many
of my contemporaries who worked
in the computer industry complained
that their, that their parents
didn't know what they did
for a living and they
would try to explain it.
And, and of course the
parents would, would go glassy-eyed
and well, as for younger
people now, their parents actually
do know a lot more
about computers, but for my
generation, they did not. So
I thought of it as
a book for our parents
to show them what digital
technologies were all about. And
then I had these crazy
ideas that maybe like actual
politicians might read it to
understand the, the computer revolution.
I don't think that came
about, but, but I did
have, I did have an
audience in mind. I always
have an audience in mind.
How would you Important is
it for like new people?
I talk about bootcamps and
self-taught learners and nontraditional learners.
And even now computer scientists
that have degrees, degreed, computer
scientists, and software engineers come
out without understanding the historical
foundations of computers before I
dunno, 1940. And without understanding
the context within which these
computers sit, Yeah, it's hard
to know how much this
affects their perspective. What I
was became disturbed about was
people were, were people who,
who seem to be very
fluent in, in high level
languages, but had no idea
what was going on underneath,
at least in, in C
plus plus and C we
had pointers. And so to
use a point here, you
had to really know the
architecture of the underlying computer,
but once, once computer languages
pretty much abandoned pointers as
M C sharp does, to
a large extent, even though
you can use point gears
when C sharp, it seemed
as if, if the programmers
didn't really know that stuff.
So I hear from a
lot of people who have
been programming for years and
sometimes decades who say, Oh,
I read code. And now
I finally understand how computers
work. And that's, that's really
gratifying. Talk about how we
stand on the shoulders of
giants. And, you know, we
think about each additional layer
of abstraction is indistinguishable from
magic, but at what point
do you need to understand
those layers of abstraction? Like
you wrote another book called
the annotated touring where you
guide through Alan Turing's paper
on computability, but does a
JavaScript programmer need to know
that? Or maybe they just
want to know it if
they want to understand the
why, but it doesn't really
make their job any easier.
Yeah. I got those questions
a lot with annotated touring.
How does this help the,
the average programmer? And I
really have to say not
much, except that there is
this common presumption and it's
even in, in the movie
about touring, the title of
which escapes me at the
moment, the imitation game, where
someone describes Turing's paper as
showing that any problem can
be solved by a computer.
And that's exactly what Turing's
paper does not show Turing's
papers, shows the opposite of
that, that there are problems
in, in mathematical logic that
cannot be solved by a
computer in particular. The big
one is the really big
one is that you can't
write a computer program that
will debug other computer programs.
You can get close as,
as the, the people in
Microsoft research have done, but
you can't guarantee that a
program is debugged entirely. That's
a scary thought that there
is no way to guarantee
that a program is entirely
debugged. And so that makes
it, that should make us
a little humble. And it
should, if somebody gets a,
a particular assignment from a
boss that involves unsolvable problems
that they can say, you
know, computers can't do everything
including this problem. Where did
touring exist in the spectrum
of kind of mathematical computation,
analog computers, digital computers. When
he was thinking about this
in 1936, what was a
computer in his mind now
that we've categorized them in
ours? That's hard to say
he was really kind of
invented. It was really a,
a intellectual tool, a tool
of the mind that a
machine that would do something
very methodically involving numbers and
would, would read symbols off
of paper tape and write
symbols back on the paper
tape. And so he was
really more of trying to
formalize what an algorithm is,
where there's no intuition. It's
just a matter of, of
recipe steps. So touring no
new of no working computers
around the same time. There
were a couple people putting
together what later became digital
computers, but touring did not
know about them. He knew
about Charles Babbage. So the
idea, and a lot of
people knew about Charles Babbage.
And so the idea of
that a machine could be
doing calculations. Wasn't entirely fanciful.
From what I could understand,
I don't think touring knew
anything about analog computing, which
had been around depending upon
how you define it. Analog
computing could go back to
the slide rule. Maybe that's
the 17th century, but the
analog computer is that interest
to me. One is from
the 1870s. This is the
subject of the book I'm
reworking on. This is a
tied predicting machine invented by
Scottish, a physicist, William Thompson also
known as Lord Kelvin. The
other big one is Vandever
bushes, a differential analyzer, which
he built in the 1920s
at MIT. And that solves
differential equations. Both these machines
I think are very clever
and that's why they, they
interest me. And, and yeah,
I don't like computing is
really a forgotten chapter in
the history of computing. And
when we say computer, we
mean digital computer and the
history, likewise is, is all
digital. Even though there are
people still alive who cut
their teeth on doing, working
on analog computers. So it's,
it's not that distant in
the past, Who sort of
puts us into kind of
a little bit of historical
context for some of the
names that we dropped for
people who are listening, who
may not follow this. So
touring conceived of an imaginary
computer in 1936 while Babbage
kind of invented the concept
of a computer and was
active in the, in the
1850s. So even 80 years,
90 years, previous Lord Kelvin
built his tied predicting machine
in 1872. So you said
in 2018 that analog computers
are a largely forgotten part
of computing. Here. We have
touring in, in 1936, not
thinking about an analog computer
that was created almost a
century previous. It was just,
it was a chapter that
wasn't even in his mind
while he was thinking about
computing. Yeah. Primarily because he
was attacking problems in mathematical
logic. Whereas the analog computers,
particularly like the differential analyzers
solve differential equations, if he
was, if Turing was interested
in solving differential equations, he
would have probably learned about
the differential analyzer, but that
wasn't what he was doing.
So it's, it's really a,
it shows, it actually shows
some of the divide, the
big Gulf between analog computing
and digital computing that they're
used for two different jobs.
So analog computers are computers
that use physical phenomenon, things
that are mechanical, or maybe
hydraulic or electrical to solve
a problem. There's this wonderful
picture that I'll, I'll try
to put up on a,
on the show notes of
this piece of hardware, of,
of wood and brass that
is Lord Kelvin's machine. Maybe
you could talk about what
that does. It doesn't look
like a computer, but it
computes In the 1860s, Lord
Kelvin, who was then known
as William Thompson got interested in
the tides. And he developed
a new process for analyzing
the tides and predicting the
tides. And what you do
is you stick a tide
gauge at some Seaport, and
this measures how the tie,
how the water is rise
and fall over the course
of the day. And you
take a reading every hour,
these tide gauges actually inscribed
the height at the tides
on, on a roll of
paper, but you take like
readings every hour for a
year or so, maybe a
couple years. And then you
apply for your analysis to
it. And you break down
the, the erratic up and
down of the tides into
sine curves. And the sine
curves will have recognizable periods.
They'll have periods of 12
hours, which is the effect
of the sun on the
tides. They'll have periods of
12 hours, 25 minutes, which
reflects the effect of the
moon on the tides. And
they'll have other periods as
well for resonance factors and
all. So you apply for
your analysis to it. You
break down the pattern of
the ties into separate sign
curves, say about 10 of
them. And then the tied
predicting machine has separate wheels
for each of these sign
curves. Each of these components,
they wheel employees, a mechanism
called a scotch yolk, which,
which translates the revolution of
the wheel to an up
and down movement. That is
the sign and the co-sign
of, of the, the wheel
angle. And by these wheels,
you can adjust a frequency
and an with gears, you
can just the frequency of
each of these wheels and,
and you can adjust the
amplitude and where it starts
and in. So you have
10 of these wheels bopping
up and down in sinusoidal
patterns and you run a
cable around them to sum
it all up. And that's
what you plot out on
the paper and the tide
predicting machine. If you see
the picture of it, when
you turn the crank, all
these wheels, Bob, up and
down, and there's a pen
that's hanging out the rise
and fall the tides into
the future because the future
is based on the summation
of the sign curves that
you derive from your historical
data. The tide predicting machine
invented in the 1870s is
doing a summation of 10
sine curves. And that to
me is fairly sophisticated in
terms of analog, analog hardware,
hardware. That doesn't seem to
be calculating in any way,
Is this, as you turn
this crank, are you effectively,
and forgive me if this
is an inappropriate dominion digitization
of this, of this amazing
invention, is this basically a
function wrap than a four
loop physically? Yes. Not really
a forum. You see a
four loop is digital. Okay.
Cause you're doing discrete numbers,
right? That's a good, That's
a very, that's a very
important and insignificant difference. This
is how our minds have
been so imbued with, with
a digital concept. Forgive me
As you turn the crank,
it is more like if
you think of, of the
sine curves as, as mathematical
functions, it's increasing the value
of T The time to
apply to the sine curves
in Oak, and it's doing
it in a continuous fashion,
It's doing it continuously. And
that's one of the things
that is so interesting about
analog computers to me, because
I think about what it
takes to calculate a sine
curve in, in a, in
a program, we, we set
up a four loop, right?
With, with our, with our
angles, let's say zero to
360 degrees. And we pass
those angles. We convert them
to radians and pass them
to the, the.net map, that
sign function. Okay. Now what's
the math ed sign function
doing well internally, it's, it's
using the math coprocessor. That's
how that's in your machine.
And the math coprocessor to
calculate each value is doing
a summation of, of a
bunch of terms involving factorials
and exponents and all this.
It's really a lot of
number crunching that goes on
to get a single sign
value and to flat out
a sign curve, you need
a bunch of these and,
and, and tape them all
together. Whereas in an analog
computer, you're getting a signed
curve, continuous sine curve with
a fairly simple mechanism. Now
some on curves are found
throughout nature. They are one
of the fundamental rhythms of
the natural world. And the
reason why is, is that
if you know, differential equations,
anytime you have a differential
equation where a force is
the inverse of displacement assigned
curve results like a spring.
If you stretch out a
spring, the more you stretch
it out to the more
force you need to stretch
it out. As you compress
it, the further you compress
it, the more force you
need to compress it. The
fourth is the force that
you need to compress it.
And the force that it's
exerting out is inverse to
the displacement. So if you
stretch out that spring and
let it go, it'll go
bouncing back and forth like
a sine curve. Anything that
Lastic has as is tip
Has this typical sign curve
a pattern. So that's why
it's. So when you see,
when you start looking at
analog computers, sign, getting signed
curves is fairly easy. Whereas
in digital computers, the only
reason we think it's easy
is because we have this
math that signed functioning, and
it happens almost instantaneously, but
internally it's doing a lot
of number crunching, which leads
me to, to think of
analog computings as a more
natural representation of real world
phenomenon and digital computers as
a Kluge, it has to
approximate this real world process
with a lot of artificial
calculations. Hey, friends just want
to take a moment to
thank our sponsors because they
make Hansel minutes possible. I,
you struggling to reproduce problems
in your code base. Well,
successful software starts with Reagan.
Reagan provides application performance monitoring,
unlike anything you've experienced before
it offers greater clarity around
how your software is performing
for your customers. More than
any other APM provider, I
use it myself. You can
easily detect and diagnose issues
impacting end users. You can
monitor every part of your
stack in one place. It's
time to get back to
building great software instead of
fighting it. Start your journey
to better software quality, try
Reagan free at Reagan that's
R a Y G U
n.com. Today. It's interesting if
you, if you think the
direction that we're heading, where
we said, we were sitting
on top of the shoulders
of giants, we're building all
of these layers of abstraction
on digital foundations in order
to simulate reality, which is
fundamentally an analog thing. And
now, as we possibly hit
the edge of what digital
computers can do, we consider
maybe quantum computers are the
right way. Here we are.
Again, a quantum computer is
almost a kind of analog
computer and that it is
using the physical characteristics of
reality itself to think about
reality. Yeah. On the other
hand, quantum computers use a
process that Richard Fineman famously
pointed out. Nobody really understands.
So that's scary to me.
It's it's we seem to
be getting more and more
divorced from our, our common
experience. There's, there's a lot
of, of analog devices and
means of recording sound and
pictures. I'll give you an
example. Before I get off
into abstractions, let me give
you an example. I don't
know. I don't know your
exact age, or if you
grew up with phonograph records,
I did. But if the
groups in a photograph record,
if you look at them
closely, if you apply a
microscope to them, you'll see
that it's little bumps in
there, and those are exactly
analogous to the wave forms
of the air. Okay? So
you can see, Oh, the
little needle is moving up
and down in the groove,
and this is, is translated
to electrical pulse. And this
electrical pulse is then translated
into a speaker vibrating back
and forth. And we can
hear the sound. We're hearing
an exact analog of little
bumps in the record groove.
Whereas nowadays, what are we
hearing? We are hearing a
wave form that is reconstituted
from a bunch of numbers.
And I'm not saying, I'm
not saying this is, this
is inferior. And I'm not
saying, I'm certainly not saying
that we should start using
analog computers to replace digital
computers. Cause they're digital computers.
You know, they have this
big advantage. They have this
major advantage that they're fast
and they're extremely accurate and
they're cheap and they're tiny.
And so it's, it doesn't
make any sense to do
anything else. You know, I,
I listened to CD's and
I listened to, to Spotify.
That's how I get my
music. I'm not one of
these people who still have
a turntable and, and, you
know, put my records on
and put the needle down
on them. I I'm as
immersed in this stuff as
anybody, but there's still something
missing. We're getting more divorced
from the actual phenomenon. I
wonder if at some point,
these abstractions are going to
leak the amount of work.
It's the amount of work
that's required for a digital
computer to do something to
represent. Reality is a, is
a, is out of control.
It's amazing. I just saw
that they're now releasing an
Nvidia GPU that has the
strength to do Ray tracing.
And I, I remember doing
Ray tracing, you would start
the right trace and you
get a single frame, you
know, the following the following
day, and now they're doing
120 frames, a second 4k
full rate tracing. But again,
trying to represent how light
behaves and works using digital
abstractions. So you're, you've been
working on this book for
15 years and you maybe
have a few years to
go, do you think this
warrants a whole book? We'll
see, well, I started off
15 years ago and I
thought, I knew how to
write this book. And I
thought it was going to
be a mix of a
little history and some physics
and math and all. And
as, as I wrote a
couple of chapters and, and
started doing, and you putting
the math in there and
I was extremely unsatisfied with
it, it just didn't, it
didn't flow. Right. And to
me, math is, is laziness
in turn. And when you're
writing is I, if you,
if you want to, you
put an equation into your
pros and you, you, the
equation is very clear itself
because it's math. There's no
ambiguity about it. But on
the other hand, on the
other hand, a lot of
people can't read that. And
so I got lazy doing
that and, and I decided
eventually decided that the book
would have no math in
it. And that I would
need to explain a lot
of these things. And I
would need to get to
a point where the reader
intuitively understood why sine curves
are so prevalent in the
natural world and get to
a point where they could
see this machine and know
what it did. So that's
going to be harder. I
also read one of the
most books I read for
myself for my own writing
is came out a few
years ago. The author is
Richard Holmes, and the book's called
the age of wonder. And
it's about science during the
late 17th century, late 18th
century, early 19th century, what's
called the romantic age. And
there's not, there's, there's no
mapping at all. There's no
hard science in it, but
this guy covers the science
in terms of literature and
poetry and art and politics
and all that. It's all
connected. And I said, this
is, this is what I
want to do. I want
to have a good cultural
context for this stuff. So
that's, that's, what's forcing me
to really do it really
forcing me to, to not
be lazy, to really do
a good job on this.
The other thing is that
this machine and the reasons
why it was built, which
is another inch, why Lord
Kelvin built this machine, why
he got him interested in
the tides related, where it
was related to his opposition
to Darwin's theory of evolution.
That to me, that, that
this was part of the
Darwin Wars. This machine, this
one of these early, an
early computer makes the subject
very sexy to me because
you're getting into a lot
of juicy stuff. So there's
a lot of other pieces
of science that fall into
it. There's the astronomy because
tides are based on the
movement of the moon and
the sun and nears analysis
during the French enlightenment of
vibrating strings. And here's the
fourth part of it. And
then there's the geology because
eventually Kelvin tried to figure
out the age of the
earth. And he came up
with something like a hundred
million years, and he didn't
think that was long enough
for evolution to occur. So
there's a big geological component
of, of, of this story.
So it's a lot of
different pieces of scientific history
that come together in this
one machine. And that is
just if it's, if it's
going to take me the
rest of my life to
write this book is so
be it. Well, let me
ask you, let me ask
you this. As I have
a 10 and 12 year
old entering middle school and
soon high school, where would
they learn this? Where would
I fit a book like
this into their curriculum? If
you've got geology and history
and technology and history of
computing and the political and
socioeconomic context of the 16
hundreds in the, where would
the dark, I mean, everybody
has this sense that Darwin
was controversial at the time
that that origin of species
was published. I mean, good
Lord. It's it's in some
circles, it's still controversy. As
we know, a lot of
this stuff, stuff is really
academic books. The conflicts during
that period, I'm trying to
make this book be as
popular as possible. I'm not
putting any math into it.
That's a, that's a, that's,
that's something. So I don't
know right now, I'm not
sure what would be a
good book for young kids
to learn the history of
science. Let me think about
that. And I will, I
will let you know, cause
your kids, your kids seem
so inquisitive and it's just
great. It's every time you
post about your kids, it's
like, ah, it's, it's often
hilarious, but they must be
amazing. Well, hopefully will, if
they continue to, to absorb
good information like this. And
I was fortunately able to
read the first chapter of
your work in progress. And
I must admit after gone,
going through five, six, seven,
eight pages, I'm thinking to
myself here comes the equation.
That's going to make me
feel not clever. And there
you go. There's a triangle
with a circle, an arc
being drawn in a pencil.
And I said, Oh, there's
not accessible. And then I
got a couple more pages
in and like, Oh, there's
a picture of the earth.
And I must say, I
felt like I was reading
something that was a smart
person book, but I didn't
feel like I was being
expected to understand, you know,
Latin symbols for summation. Good.
Which is a nice feeling.
I appreciate that. So if
you're writing this book, are
we just gonna follow you@charlespetzold.com
and then watch and learn
as this comes to life?
We just wait until it
comes out. Yeah. I, I
hope to post chapters. I'm
not sure about posting every
chapter in progress. That may
be a little anticlimactic when
the actual book comes out,
if it does come out.
But yeah, I'm going to
be posting more on Facebook
as, as the book develops
on Facebook and my blog.
So yeah, Charles petzold.com. It's
not a, I really need
to do a major upheaval
on the website, but that'll
be coming as well. No
worries. I really appreciate you
coming on the show and
like the working title is
computer of the tides. And
I just have to say,
I love that title. I
think that's just a wonderful
title for this book. Cool.
Thank you. Well, thanks so
much for talking with me
today about all these things.
I'm going to include links
and show notes so that
you can go and explore
analog computers and Babbage and
touring. And of course, go
to Amazon and search for
Charles pencil to check out
many years of great books,
all recommended so much. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and we'll see
you again next week. .